README.md, before:

# SMARTmon Exporter with Dashboard

`smartmon` is a [Textfile Collector](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter#textfile-collector) for Prometheus Node Exporter to gather information on SATA HDDs, SSDs and NVMe devices.  A Grafana Dashboard for this exporter is included.

## Requirements

* [Node Exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter) with [textfile collectors](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter#textfile-collector) enabled
* Cronjob to run SMARTmon Exporter to generate textfile for Node Exporter
* [smartmontools](https://www.smartmontools.org/) installed and configured performing scheduled device tests
* [moreutils](https://joeyh.name/code/moreutils/) package which provides [sponge](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/man1/sponge.1.html) utility for atomically write output to file

### How do I set it up?

1. Configure Node Exporter to enable text file collectors.

    Create directory for Node Exporter Textfile Collector to scan:

    ```shell
    mkdir -p /var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector
    ```

    Added the following to Node Exporter command-line configuration:

    ```shell
    --collector.textfile.directory=/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector
    ```

    * When using Node Exporter deployed in Kubernetes, the path to the host directory outside the pod will be different, such as: `/host/root/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector`

2. Place `smartmon.sh` in `/usr/local/bin/` and give it execute permissions.

3. Create a cron entry to run `smartmon.sh` at regular interval such as every 5 minutes:

    ```shell
    $ sudo crontab -e

    # Opens in text editor
    ```

    Add the following line to run every 5 minutes:

    ```text
    */5 * * * * /usr/local/bin/smartmon.sh | /usr/bin/sponge /var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector/smartmon.prom
    ```

* The `sponge` utility will help prevent a partially written `smartmon.prom` file being consumed by Node Exporter Textfile Collector.

---

### Quick Test

To check if `smartmon.sh` is able to collect metrics from `smartctl`:

```shell
$ sudo smartmon.sh | grep smartmon_device_active

# HELP smartmon_device_active SMART metric device_active
# TYPE smartmon_device_active gauge
smartmon_device_active{disk="/dev/nvme0",type="nvme"} 1
smartmon_device_active{disk="/dev/sda",type="sat"} 1
```

* Indicates 1 SATA device (/dev/sda) and 1 NVMe device (/dev/nvme) are being monitored on this host.

---

### Prometheus Metrics Check

Once the cron job has executed, you should find metrics within Prometheus:

![Prometheus smartmon metrics](./images/prometheus_metrics.png)

* If no metrics are being collected, review the Node Exporter collection logs.

---

### Deploy Grafana Dashboard

The Grafana dashboard `smartmon.json` can be imported to Grafana to provide visualization of monitored devices:

![Grafana Dashboard](./images/grafana_dashboard.png)

* Visualization shows storage devices monitored within my Kubernetes cluster.

NOTE - The dashboard uses a label `kubernetes_node` instead of the Node Exporter `instance` (IP address and port).  This label is added with a Prometheus `relabeling` such as:

```yaml
relabelings:
  - action: replace
    regex: (.*)
    replacement: $1
    sourceLabels: ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_node_name"]
    targetLabel: kubernetes_node
```

* The dashboard will not render correctly without this label.
  * You could manually replace all the `kubernetes_node` references with `instance` if you are unable to add the label.

Commit message:

Added replacement reference to smartctl-exporter.

README.md, after:

# SMARTmon Exporter with Dashboard - Archived

**NOTE:** I'm no longer supporting this exporter, it is not needed.  Use the [Prometheus smartctl-exporter](https://github.com/prometheus-community/smartctl_exporter) instead.  I've converted my exporter dashboard to be compatible with `smartctl-exporter`.  Use Grafana Dashboard ID: `22604` for `smartctl-exporter`.

![smartctl-exporter dashboard](./images/new_smartctl_exporter_dashboard.png)

---

`smartmon` _was_ a [Textfile Collector](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter#textfile-collector) for Prometheus Node Exporter to gather information on SATA HDDs, SSDs and NVMe devices.  A Grafana Dashboard for this exporter is included.

## Requirements

* [Node Exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter) with [textfile collectors](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter#textfile-collector) enabled
* Cronjob to run SMARTmon Exporter to generate textfile for Node Exporter
* [smartmontools](https://www.smartmontools.org/) installed and configured performing scheduled device tests
* [moreutils](https://joeyh.name/code/moreutils/) package which provides [sponge](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/man1/sponge.1.html) utility for atomically write output to file

### How do I set it up?

1. Configure Node Exporter to enable text file collectors.

    Create directory for Node Exporter Textfile Collector to scan:

    ```shell
    mkdir -p /var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector
    ```

    Added the following to Node Exporter command-line configuration:

    ```shell
    --collector.textfile.directory=/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector
    ```

    * When using Node Exporter deployed in Kubernetes, the path to the host directory outside the pod will be different, such as: `/host/root/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector`

2. Place `smartmon.sh` in `/usr/local/bin/` and give it execute permissions.

3. Create a cron entry to run `smartmon.sh` at regular interval such as every 5 minutes:

    ```shell
    $ sudo crontab -e

    # Opens in text editor
    ```

    Add the following line to run every 5 minutes:

    ```text
    */5 * * * * /usr/local/bin/smartmon.sh | /usr/bin/sponge /var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector/smartmon.prom
    ```

* The `sponge` utility will help prevent a partially written `smartmon.prom` file being consumed by Node Exporter Textfile Collector.

---

### Quick Test

To check if `smartmon.sh` is able to collect metrics from `smartctl`:

```shell
$ sudo smartmon.sh | grep smartmon_device_active

# HELP smartmon_device_active SMART metric device_active
# TYPE smartmon_device_active gauge
smartmon_device_active{disk="/dev/nvme0",type="nvme"} 1
smartmon_device_active{disk="/dev/sda",type="sat"} 1
```

* Indicates 1 SATA device (/dev/sda) and 1 NVMe device (/dev/nvme) are being monitored on this host.

---

### Prometheus Metrics Check

Once the cron job has executed, you should find metrics within Prometheus:

![Prometheus smartmon metrics](./images/prometheus_metrics.png)

* If no metrics are being collected, review the Node Exporter collection logs.

---

### Deploy Grafana Dashboard

The Grafana dashboard `smartmon.json` can be imported to Grafana to provide visualization of monitored devices:

![Grafana Dashboard](./images/grafana_dashboard.png)

* Visualization shows storage devices monitored within my Kubernetes cluster.

NOTE - The dashboard uses a label `kubernetes_node` instead of the Node Exporter `instance` (IP address and port).  This label is added with a Prometheus `relabeling` such as:

```yaml
relabelings:
  - action: replace
    regex: (.*)
    replacement: $1
    sourceLabels: ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_node_name"]
    targetLabel: kubernetes_node
```

* The dashboard will not render correctly without this label.
  * You could manually replace all the `kubernetes_node` references with `instance` if you are unable to add the label.
